What do you do?
Either you say, no, we're not buying today, because you mustn't say, I don't like to look at it, or else you take it in and you try to find out where it came from.
And that sometimes is difficult.
So one very vivid one in my memory is when I got a phone call from Melbourne in Australia from my friend bookseller there.
And he said that somebody had been into his bookstore in Melbourne.
with a lovely book for sale and it had come of course from grandmother's old attic in an old house in Melbourne he said that didn't look right because in it there were a price and the price was the current price of today so it certainly wasn't from an old attic but it had a library played for a name which he didn't know so he rang me
And I happened to go that day to an association meeting.
The committee.
I asked the committee, anybody know his name?
And somebody popped up and said, of course I know this.
This is his collection.
I've just sold him a little bit.
And this was unaccessioned.
It was in the basement.
In the library in Melbourne.
And this young woman was an assistant.
So it hadn't been?
It hadn't been accessioned or stamped.
So that was stopped.
It's not on the records yet.
Exactly.
I was preaching about this meeting in the Lake District.
There was another one where a young man
He had books, beautiful books for sale.
And he came to us, and he came in also to Pickering and Chateau in Panama.
And he was too young to have books of that quality.
Didn't look right.
And the fool of a youngster was wearing a school tie.
And one of the people in Pickering and Chateau recognised the school tie.
See, isn't it amazing?
So he ran the school.
And it turned out straight away, this was another collection that they'd been given that was in a locked up basement store.
And this youngster had been made on Liberia or something, so he had the pick of the place.
But he had this tie.
What a great detail for a perspective story.
So I had him in here then.
I had a new person.
I'm not sure what I did, but I had his headmaster.
What was to be done with this youngster?
And that's a good parent, because I was very concerned about it.
What should they do?
And the story was unbelievable, but the parents were separated.
This youngster knew that money was tight, and that school was extremely expensive.
He thought he could raise some money to help him with the school fees, to help his mother.
But what should be done with him?
And of course the school didn't want to know.
Get him out.
And they probably didn't want a lot of publicity on it either.
Of course not.
So I started thinking the other way.
What about the soul of that young man who was to hand to him?
Could he be saved?
But it's probably better just to get rid of him.
Very, very difficult indeed.
No, I think they got shot of him.
I'd be sure they did.
Well, let's face it.
It was not an innocent thing that he did.
It wasn't innocent.
No.
I mean, it's theft, no matter how.
Of course, you've heard that now all the libraries in Russia, formerly the Soviet Union, that stuff is being plundered now.
I mean, public libraries.
Yes.
It's unbelievable.
And where is it?
being sold, I guess, outside of where the money is.
By whom?
Probably from people who worked in there, you know, who knows.
But I just saw a piece from the New York Times.
Does it have stamps?
You see, I'm, I don't know that.
Probably it does, but probably doing the same thing as the... Am I now to get a portrait of you if it's... No, I don't want you to dress up or anything.
I don't know whether it was, whether I got the right lens on and thought that I'm going to try.
Oh, yes, that's all right, that's okay.
It's an automatic, so there's no trouble.
Switch on.
See what happens.
Oh, the rounds.
That's better.
There it is.
I'm no good at doing this.
Well, that proves I was here.
But, no, you've done a very interesting book there, and you haven't been murdered yet.
Because your investigation on that was pretty serious.
It was a bit scary.
It was, and we heard from him, you know.
Because you are an attorney, aren't you?
No, I'm not.
I'm a journalist.
I've done investigative work.
Yes.
You read, didn't you, about a woman journalist in Ireland?
No.
And she investigated too much, and they got her.
Well, that's not likely to hand happen with Haven.
But we heard from him afterwards.
He threatened to sue me for fifteen million dollars.
Now, what about Arnold Fawkes?
This is a new name of me.
F-A-W-C-U-S.
Arnold Fawkes.
Do you know all about the Trianon Press?
No.
Who was printing the books?
Oh, sure.
For Sir Jeffrey Keynes.
That's right, yeah.
And Arnold Fawkes was the printer, trading as the Trianon Press.
Mm-hmm.
And
He's one of the most colorful characters of this last sort of 30 years.
He's a publisher.
Printer?
He was the man who had the posh wire printing in a house.
And it was always said, I don't know if it was true, it was said that in the war he'd been a secret agent working for both sides at once, which could have been.
But he produced those.
You've seen all the Trianon first, haven't you?
I have.
I know it by reputation, but I don't... They were beautiful.
They were poshoire.
You know what that is.
You should explain it for us.
Where the colouring is basically hand.
Through stencils.
And so they're almost the same as originals.
Very, very time consuming and tedious.
But beautifully done.
Is this a dying art?
Yes.
I'm also interested in the book arts, too.
He died in France, I think.
Time-consuming.
And then, have you been into Joe Stodden?
No.
Editions, Alecto, A-L-E-C-T-O.
Because I would like to direct you to him.
Unless you're in London.
Yes.
And his name again?
Stodden, Stoddholm, S-T-U-D-H-O-L-N-E.
And he had that incredible project.
I'm sorry, I'm back to Captain Cook again.
But when Cook was all that wrecked on the barrier reef in Queensland, he had to get the ship ashore while she was repaired.
And all his botanists went off botanising.
And they came back with wonderful watercolors, bringing up all the wonderful plants they'd seen which were new to science.
And anyway, these drawings all got back to London and all the others that he'd made on the voyage.
And Joseph Banks decided that they had got to be engraved.
And so he got his engravers on doing the most fabulous work of engraving from one of these drawings.
He died without a book ever being done properly.
And the drawings were saved and passed into the Natural History Museum in London.
And finally, they gave the assignment to this chap Studham, edition of Alecto Studham, which he called the Banks Flora Legion.
Surely you've heard of that?
Yes.
In fact, there was a biography of Banks just a few years ago.
Well, the Banks Flora Legion, the most ambitious publishing venture perhaps since the war,
And he did it.
And they are like, you can pick them off.
They're so real.
I've never had one.
I've had them through as specimens, but I've never had one for stock that are far too expensive.
And in all the great libraries around the world, you see them.
Wasn't it, who did a wonderful biography of him?
Wasn't Patrick O'Brien the novelist?
Didn't he do something?
I'd rather think it was.
I think it was.
Yes.
It was a wonderful, wonderful book on him.
But Alecto.
Alecto.
And he's here in London.
He's here in London.
And he's at just a few streets over here.
But you ought to go into his office and just see.
And that's another of these things up there above your head.
Oh, wow.
Maximilian.
if always to North America.
So what street would that be on, do you think?
It's on Sackville.
Say CK, Sackville.
Sackville, and it's just beside the entrance to Sotherham's Bookshop.
Sotherham.
You're a font of information.
Excellent.
And that is the most amazing story, this chap, that's a million.
went through North America as a German potentate.
You can see his track there, going by canoe, mostly.
And he took a Swiss artist with him called Bodmer.
That's magnificent.
Do you know all this story or not?
No, I don't think.
And Bodmer made drawings, what kind of drawings of the Indians, and so on, everywhere they went.
And this was the Indians as they were.
I know about the Indians.
I didn't know about this, but I know about the Bodmer around.
The Bodmer paintings around.
That's right.
This is it.
And there, all the copper plates were still extant in the family castle in Germany and were bought and are now in Omaha, Nebraska.
Omaha?
What's in Omaha?
It's life insurance, isn't it?
Wow.
And having not been kept up to this story, because it is so wonderful.
And so they sent
they authorised Joe Stodden, a director, to republish these fond copper plates.
Not reprints, but restrikes.
Wow.
And they are so beautiful.
And he did that right over here?
Yes.
Is this where the presses are?
The presses have, I think, been dispersed now.
But, wonderful then.
Have you been given a note about the
a monotype corporation that went down the drain because nobody wants monotype anymore and so Nicholas Barker whom you must know of Croatia raised money for the purchase of all their relics and he's found a home in South London where all this equipment and the type is there being preserved
And it's the most amazing story, but he's desperate to raise more money for it.
He wants angels.
He needs angels for that.
To provide funding.
I'm surprised some of the newspapers don't... If you can tap them, that's the point.
But, yes, the Monotype Corporation.
There's a wonderful press, with old presses and type, at the University of Toronto.
I spent three days up there, and this project is fascinating.
And I'm also very close with the R.O.M.
That's right, which is marvelous.
It's a live-wire institution, that.
Well, but, um, yes.
Are you going to be interviewing Nicholas Barker?
I don't know if I'm going to see him this trip.
I interviewed him.
You have to run fast to catch him.
He's a hard man to get in touch with.
I wrote him, and I did see him in Los Angeles last year.
He gave me a talk that I gave, and I did interview him.
You came alongside, that's why I could, because he was talking at this same meeting in the Lake District where I was.
Have you heard of a collector named Jack Lundzer around?
He must say, yes.
Val Madonna.
Val Madonna is the, it's a Jewish thing.
I hear it's pretty spectacular.
It's almost like a museum, isn't it?
He's a diamond merchant.
He's a diamond merchant out of South Africa, is that right?
Maybe.
Probably so.
But he's a bit secretive.
I heard that, yeah.
He buys very much through salaries.
I got on the fringes of it.
I haven't done any business with him, really.
Yes, I have met him.
I mean, is that...
tipped that.
That was diamonds.
You're kidding.
Valmadonna is called, but it's very mysterious.
Of the organisation, yes.
It's a foundation, or what it is.
So they don't let people in to see the collection, so far as you know.
I don't know where the collection is, actually, but I know he has some of his books in London.
But he's a mystery now.
But you see, the trouble is now burglary as such that you've got to go behind, in his case, steel doors, because you're so scared.
And I'm not going to quote you at all on this.
And the golden rule, of course, is never talk to the press.
Of course, yeah.
Because they are enemies.
But I heard that this is a fascinating collection.
It will be extensively Jewish.
But probably one of the best.
Yes, exactly.
And I think it's artifacts as well.
But very secretive.
Which, of course, makes me very interested.
Exactly.
Yes, I'm privileged to have met him.
Really?
Youngish man?
No, no.
My sort of contemporaries.
Can you think of any other questions?
Well, you've been so kind with your time service, you've given us an hour and a half already.
Look, I enjoy it.
But, do you know, I read your book at once, and the quotations that you put down to me, and you know what I said to myself?
Well, I don't remember this interview at all.
But I said, if
If it was really real, that's exactly what I would have said.
I sat right here.
I have the tapes.
I use this machine.
Well, that's it, because they're typical things that I would have said, so I thought it must have been right.
I could never come up with the books were thick on the ground.
I mean, that's nothing I would ever... I don't trust the press.
Have you met Sheila Markham?
No.
She writes for this.
You know this journal, I hope.
Oh, right.
That's a British journal.
Yes.
We have a similar one.
No, you couldn't have.
I don't know.
This is absolutely marvelous.
And there is the story of one of the most horrible things to have happened in this last ten or more years of an auction sale in South Africa.
And the property was being sold by Bight.
I want to give you a photo copy of that piece.
That would be great.
Because this is the story to rock the boat
And the thing had sold, and the hammer fell, and it was bought by the bookseller in Johannesburg, who was a good friend of mine, who was used to be a lawyer as well.
And then having sold it, there was a fuss.
And another lawyer in the sale room said, no, I was bidding on that, sir.
But he wasn't.
He was too late.
But being the important man he was, he ultimately reopened the bill,
very, very, very important thing.
And so it was put up again.
And so his bookseller bought it again the second time.
And he bought.
And he then claimed that it was his.
And he attempted to pay the bill at the first price.
But Miss Sarah was a multi-millionaire bride who was now dead.
So he went to law.
And it went to appeal.
And finally now, the bookseller has lost the case.
He lost the case.
Whether it's going to cost him a quarter of a million or what, I don't know.
Probably a lot of money.
But he still was successful in both bits.
He'll now have to pay the higher price, I assume.
Or maybe he's lost the wholesale entirely.
So just what the status of the stuff is, I don't know.
But this is a thing we're very worried about, is the fall of a hammer.
Because it now is meaningless.
And some of it, in their wisdom, you buy it.
Bam, the hammer has fallen.
Five minutes later, the auctioneer says, oh, sorry, Elsie, you made a mistake here about that block five minutes ago.
They do that?
Yeah.
And I'm within my rights to put it up again.
It's against you.
And he said, and you said, no, sir, I bought it.
That's mine.
No, I'm within my rights to re-offer it.
So it's still continuing and so on.
And they tried this on one of the biggest art dealers in Barn Street.
And they contested it.
And they said, no, we bought it, and we're paying that first price.
So it's all that it's about to sue them.
And it went on to go to the House of Lords.
At that point, it's all that it's got to worry.
So they settled.
That's right, because if they lose, that's quite a precedent.
They don't want a precedent.
Because it's case law, and they don't want that.
No.
They'd much rather intimidate you the way they are doing now.
And so now is this case running on the BBC, which you've been following from to?
No, they will get the BBC.
This extraordinary thing.
One of some of his staff, or even senior staff, shocked them, as the expression is, and threatened to explode and expose what was going on inside the place.
That's a great story.
And so they put him in the court.
in the Crown Court.
It was hushed up anyway.
But then the television got onto it and a particular journalist, Lala Hugh, and he wrote the thing up and they made a television program out of it.
So several of his directors were suspended
This was to do with illegal export of antiquities from Italy.
Well, that's a big story, yeah.
So they set up, the television people set it up as an inquiry process.
We do know this story.
And they had a television camera.
That's right.
The young woman had a television camera in her brooch.
So they went round places and they filmed it.
Dirty business altogether.
We did have, the New York Times did cover that.
We'll have covered that one.
Yeah, we effectively flipped it.
It isn't finished yet, and the book is now coming out.
It could be a dirty business.
We had an association meeting on this, and the feeling was very strong that be careful how you handle this one, because you may think it's going to knock some of these, but it will knock everybody.
because all this dirty business.
And so our chairman that evening looked round the room and said, I suppose there's nobody in this room really who could say totally honestly that they've never done anything wrong.
Such as when somebody comes in here wanting to buy something and they've got a roll of banknotes.
I've had that.
Where do the banknotes come from?
Put the roll of banknotes on the table, would that help to influence your decision?
Well, you're desperate for money, and here's this roll of money.
And you still say no, but it's a little bit like a pretty girl in Piccadilly.
You said the woman's name is Sheila Markham, is that?
Sheila Markham, yes, and she's a columnist for the book dealer.
But you ought, you know, to, I think, speak to Barry Shaw.
Who's the owner of this thing?
Of that magazine?
Yes.
It's principally, of course, of Books Wanted.
But he puts this wonderful editorial.
Let's see if I can... Yes.
Yes.
I'll do a photo copy of that for you.
That'd be great.
But Danny Shaw is a really good man.
Well, this is the kind of man who could do a scene inside.
But he's a rival journalist, remember.
I'm writing a book.
I'm not writing for, you know, David.
Let's just give you a photo copy of it.